Do you think we should agegate synthetic
relationships?
>> I I don't think that agegating is a
particularly bad idea for for synthetic
AI characters that try and act like
people because we don't know what the
effects are. Um I I think it's easy to
be alarmist and catastrophic about it.
The effects may end up being very good.
I don't know, but neither does anyone
else.
Ethan Mollik is a professor at the
Wharton School and a leading voice on
how AI is changing work, creativity, and
education. Ethan also writes the popular
Substack, One Useful Thing. He joins it.
Where does this podcast find you, Ethan?
>> I'm outside of beautiful Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
>> There you go. Are you at school or is
that your home or
>> I'm at my home? Yeah, that's my game
collection back there. So
>> Oh, I like it. Uh, so let's bust right
into it. Anthropic CEO Dario Amote
recently released a 38 page essay in
which he delivers a very ominous warning
about AI and the threat it poses to our
society. Why? Why do you think the CEO
of one of the largest AI companies in
the world seems to be so pessimistic
about AI and what do you make of this
view? Is it is it more of this kind of
virtue signaling and not meaning it or
do you think he's generally trying to
build a better AI?
>> So I think that there's always debates
right there's like external facing but
like when you talk to these people
internally I think uh Anthropic is
fairly sincere about their views about
how AI works. You may or may not agree
with them. He actually has a pair of
essays, one on like the bright future
ahead of all of us and the other about
uh our uh potential doom. Um and
pointing out issues that may actually
occur. So, you know, it always is a
question of weirdness that you're
building this thing if uh if you're so
worried about it. But I think it is a
sincere anxiety.
>> A quote from the essay, humanity is
about to be handed almost unimaginable
power and it's deeply unclear whether
our social, political, and technological
systems possess the maturity to wield
it. Uh do you agree with that? And also
what does Ethan Mollik think are the
biggest dangers of AI or what are you
worried about?
>> So you know I I'm in kind of in a weird
boat here which is I think that there's
a lot of worries about the existential
risks of AI and so people leap ahead
five years assume the turn current path
continues and there's no sign yet by the
way that AI is slowing down development
but there's a move towards sort of
existential you know Dario in that essay
talks about what would a a group of
geniuses in a data center they're
smarter than any human what would they
do? I'm actually much more concerned and
thinking about how we guide the next few
years to make AI help people thrive and
succeed rather than the negative, you
know, consequences that could happen.
How do we mitigate those negative risks?
So, I think there's a nitty-gritty path
between here and some imagined future.
We don't know if AI is going to get
there to sort of super powerful and
autonomous, but we do know it's
disruptive today. So I worry a lot about
how do we model the right kinds of work
so that when we start using AI at work
uh that we do it in ways that empower
people rather than fire people. How do
we think about AI in education so that
it helps students learn rather than
undermines learning? How do we think
about using society in ways that don't
lead to deep fakes and dependencies? I I
think there's two sides to each of these
coins and we need to get very
nitty-gritty about which things we care
about.
>> Well, I'll put forward a thesis and you
tell me where I've got it right or
wrong. I'm actually an AI optimist and I
think it it's easy you just sound
smarter when you catastrophize and I do
a lot of that but the the existential
risk of it turning into you know a
sentient being and deciding that in a
millisecond that we should no longer
exist or self-healing weapons. I don't
see any reason why AI couldn't use as
much for defensive measures as offensive
inequality that's already here. We've
opted for that. Um, and I'll come back
to something I'm more worried about, but
what I see, I'm an investor in a company
called Section AI that helps
corporations upskill the enterprise for
AI. And what we have seen or what they
have seen is that the adoption is
woefully under penetrated within the
actual organizations. At least in the
enterprise, individuals are using AI for
therapy or how to reduce their workload
on a Friday. I mean, is all of this
quite frankly and is and also I I wonder
if the CEOs have a vested interest in
catastrophizing because it makes it
sound like the technology is world
changing and that much more powerful and
please sign up for my $350 billion round
at Anthropic. Is some of this quite
frankly just is some of the dread and
doom just quite is just inflated? I
>> I mean sure. I mean, but some of it is
also they drink their own Kool-Aid like
they believe this stuff whether whether
that serves marketing or not. But I I do
want to take a step back. I'm a business
school professor, right? You know, like
you and so I've been doing a lot of work
with my colleagues on impacts of AI at
work. And there's a few things. One is
there are fairly large impacts in any
randomized control trial. We see we did
early experiment with my colleagues at
Harvard, MIT, University of Warwick, at
Boston Consulting Group. We found 40%
improvements in quality using the now
obsolete GPT4 with people weren't even
trained. 26% faster work. Penetration
rates are up there. It's interesting.
Companies, people are using AI, but
they're not talking about it. They're
not using the corporate AI. So about 50%
of American workers use AI. They report,
by the way, three times productivity
gains on the tasks they use AI for.
They're just not giving that to
companies, right? Because why would you?
Like you're worried you'll get fired if
AI shows you that you're more efficient.
You look like a genius right now and
maybe you know the AI is the genius.
You're doing less work. So I think that
there's a difference between what
companies are seeing about adoption,
what's actually happening with adoption.
Um the CEO of of section says that right
now it's being used at work for therapy
and so someone who understands AI is
giving themsel another day off that that
why sharpen the sword publicly that you
cuts your own head off with what
specific tasks at work have you seen in
your studies in your research have
registered the greatest increases in
productivity? What's been overestimated
and what's underestimated in terms of
the disruption or the improvements in
productivity at the workplace? So I
think the big picture overestimation and
underestimation is work is complicated
and organizations are complicated right
so you can get lots of individual
productivity game but if that's
producing 10 times more powerp points
than you did before that's not
necessarily going to translate to any
actual benefit for the company so
leadership needs to start thinking about
how do you build organizations around
this at the individual level though huge
impacts and you know coding especially
has taken this massive leap we have
earlier evidence that you saw about a
38% improvement in uh in the amount of
code people were writing when They
started using agentic coding tools with
no increase in error rates. But that's
even increased further. The newest
coding tools um both the um people in
charge at on the research level at
OpenAI and Anthropic have said 100% of
their code is now written by AI. That's
actually quite believable um given how
good these tools have become. We're
seeing similar things um you know
managerial task medicine. We're seeing
impacts in um scientific publication
super interesting area. uh people who
started using AI early to write
scientific papers and we know this
because there's a great study that looks
at when they started using the word
delve which was a dead giveaway you were
using AI back in 2023 if you use delve a
lot in 2023 then you actually publish
about a third more papers in higher
quality journals afterwards now the
question is is that good for science to
have more AI writing separate issue so
there's that's the sort of process
versus detail problem right people are
becoming individually more productive
the system isn't built to handle a mix
of high quality and lowquality and is
more work and that's where the
bottleneck often is.
>> You coined this great term um to
describe AI called the jagged frontier.
I love that. Which encapsulate
encapsulates how AI is really good at
certain things but really bad at others.
I'm I'm the CEO of a Fortune 500
company. I've just spent a bunch of
money on an anthropic site license and
I've got actually, you know, the music
has to match the words in terms of my
embracing AI on earnings calls. If you
were advising me and I said look where
should I be overinvesting and
underinvesting and where can you what
areas of the organization should I focus
on to try and deploy AI for meaningful
productivity gains and which areas
should I avoid that aren't yielding the
type of benefit that was once
advertised. So I think that equation
starts with a realization which is
nobody knows what's going on, right?
Like I I talk to all the AI labs on a
regular basis. I don't take money from
them, but I talk to them all. Um I I you
do research on this. I talk to policy
makers and CEOs and it's not like
there's a playbook out there, right?
This is a we're a thousand days into
after the release of Chat GPT. Like
everyone's figuring this out at the same
time. I'm seeing companies getting
incredible amounts of benefit um and
other companies struggle and part of
that is how much they're willing to
embrace the fact that they have to do
R&D themselves. So part of the value of
giving people access to these tools is
experts figure out use cases, right? If
you're doing something in a field you
know well, it's very cheap to experiment
with AI and figure out what's good or
bad at because you're doing the job
anyway and you easily look at the
results and see whether they're good or
bad results. If you're paying someone to
do R&D for you, that's a very expensive
process. So people are inventing uses
all the time. So the most successful
case I'm seeing are a combination of
what I call leadership lab and crowd.
The leaders of the company have a clear
direction, set right incentives to make
things happen. think about process. They
give the crowd, everybody in the
organization access to these tools to
use advanced tools like you know
anthropics tools or open AAI or or
Gemini. Uh and then they have an
internal team that is actually thinking
about what you build. So they're
harvesting ideas from other people. So
I'm seeing this happening everywhere
from you know there's certainly a lot of
stuff happening with internal processes,
security, customer service, um like lots
of stuff on analytics like the AIS are
quite smart. So if you let them do
analysis work, you can actually get
really big impacts from that as well.
Just wide ranges, but very different
across organizations depending on where
their expertise is and how aggressive
they are about trying to experiment.
>> I know Mark Beni off and it's just so
it's borderline obnoxious how many times
he'll figure out a way to insert the
term agentic AI or the agentic layer.
And to be blunt, I'm not sure I entirely
understand the difference between AI and
agentic AI. Can you break it down for us
and why so many really smart people such
as Mark Ben off seem to be talking about
egentic AI?
>> It's a great question. Um, first of all,
you know, you started this off by
talking about marketing. Part of the
problem with AI is there's a anytime a
new phrase comes out, there's a blur of
confusing different interpretations of
it because everyone wants to sell AI
product right now. So, it's really easy
to get to get uh bogged down. So agents
basically can be defined as an AI tool
that is given an AI that's given access
to tools. So it can do things like write
code, search the web, and do things that
when given a goal can autonomously try
and accomplish that goal on its own and
correct its course if it needs to. So an
agent would typically be something where
you could say, "Hey, you know, I'm going
to have uh Ethan on this podcast,
research everything about him, come up
with a, you know, a pitch deck on on
what, you know, why we might want to
have him on the cast. talk about
interesting things that he might have
said before and then boil this down to
five really good questions to ask and it
would go out and do the research and 20
minutes later you get kind of a complete
result. That's an agent at work. So
agents are basically the chat bots that
you use today when you go to chatbt plus
we call an agentic harness a set of
tools and capabilities they have
searching the web writing code
connecting to your data that lets them
do more work. So when you combine those
two together that's where you get
semi-aututonomous AI. Give me I'm a CEO,
a student, a mid-level professional.
What is and I've done very little so far
around AI and I want to catch up. What
is the Ethan Mullik AI tech stack? What
should I be downloading, subscribing to?
Uh how do I get started here? What LLMs,
agents, whatever the term is, would you
recommend investing in right now? Okay.
So, the the the
good thing about AI is it's very
democratic, right? There's no better
model than the ones you have access to
today. You or every kid in Mozan beek
has access to the exact same tools that
are at Goldman Sachs or Department of
Defense or anywhere else. There's no
better models. They're basically being
released as soon as they come out. That
being said, the really good models tend
to be cost you at least 20 bucks a
month. So, you are probably going to
want to subscribe to either Google's
Gemini product, Anthropics Cloud
product, or OpenAI's uh chat GBT product
for 20 bucks a month. And you're going
to want to when you do a serious work,
pick their advanced thinking model. So,
GPT 5.2 thinking is important to use.
Anthropic 4.5 Opus and Gemini 3 Pro.
Those are the sort of starting pack of
tools you can use. They're all capable
of doing agentic work. Um, you can
access them through the chatbot. And I
always recommend people just start by
trying to do stuff they do for their
job. Ask it for everything you do that
day. Just ask the also generate some
ideas for me. Give me feedback on this.
Help me write this email. Create the
presentation that will help you map the
jagged frontier of what AI is good or
bad at. And it's a really good starting
point. Like there's a lot of other
complicated stuff. If you want to do,
you know, research, uh, the deep
research tools for Google are currently
better through this product called
Notebook LM. And that's free and that's
very good. If you want to do coding, you
probably want to use Claude Code, which
you have to download. But the basics are
pick one of the big three, pay the 20
bucks a month, and then start using
them. You need eight or 10 hours of just
talking to it like a person and seeing
what results you get.
>> And give us a the lay of the land. My
sense is that OpenAI was dominant. still
dominant but that the empire strikes
back specifically Gemini is making
inroads capturing share and anthropic
has made real progress in the enterprise
market. So that's the limit of my
knowledge about the the playing field.
Can you add color to that around the
dynamics uh the intraplay here if this
were a league? What what teams are
coming up and what is what is
descending?
>> Yeah. So to take half a step back right
on what drives the underlying dynamic is
something called the scaling laws. Um
and the scaling laws basically tell you
the larger your AI model is which means
the more data you need to build it the
more data centers the more electricity
the more you know the more chips the
better your AI model is. And it's very
hard to build a small model to compete
against the larger model. They're just
better at everything. You could build
you know once you have one of those you
could do all kinds of variations but you
have to build a big model. And um
there's a bunch of other tricks that you
could do on top of that, but that's
that's pretty critical. And because of
that, there's only a few companies that
could actually play in this space,
right? So in the US, we mentioned the
big three, which is Google, Anthropic,
and OpenAI. There's also Elon Musk's X,
which has been scaling quite quickly.
XAI, and um there's also Meta, which has
been quiet recently, but is spending a
lot of money in this space. Outside of
that, there's a lot of people with
smaller competitive, but they're not
really competitive. Amazon, Apple, they
don't really have their own models that
compete. There's also three or four big
Chinese companies that are producing
very good models or releasing them for
free to the world and one French company
in the same boat. So within that dynamic
there's there's this competition about
who could build the biggest data set or
who could train the biggest model
because bigger models are smarter, who
could put the most research and tricks
into them. And it the it really is
interpersonal in some ways like the
heads of these companies are really out
to get each other, right? Like they they
do care about winning this race. They
think they should be dominant. And so
there is a lot of resources being put
into getting ahead of the other people
in this space uh one way or another. So
right now the the sort of three most
polished models are Google's OpenAI's
and anthropics and again which one is
better is changing on a day-by-day basis
as or at least weekby-eek basis as each
one releases new new approaches. Um and
then you know we're waiting to see if
anyone else kind of catches up to them.
But those those three are in a very
tight race. As soon as one of them comes
up with a product that uses AI in a new
way, the other two copy it, right? So,
Claude code is currently the very hot
coding tool. OpenAI has codeex which is
a very similar thing. Gemini has its own
set of tools. Deep research was invented
or first came out from Google. Now,
there's deep research projects for
anthropic and from OpenAI. So, you could
kind of pick any of the three of them
and be in good shape as long as they
could keep growing and spending money
and they don't hit a wall in
development, which hasn't happened yet.
Is it essentially that, you know,
different flavors of the same ice cream
here? Or if if I think of luxury brands,
BMW, Mercedes, and Audi, I think I could
do a reasonable job of attempting to
outline how they're they differentiate
from one another and who is the right
customer for each of those brands. Can
you do the same thing for those big
three or are they all just the kind of
mostly the same?
>> I can. Right. What I worry about is
trying to talk to all the various
levels, right? What do you do if you're
just starting off? Pick any of the
three, you'll be fine. But I think
people who use them a lot, they have
personalities, right? Those
personalities are shaped by the
companies, the way they train. I mean,
it's amazing that they're all so similar
to each other that things basically work
across all three. Like, you won't expect
Microsoft and and um you know, and uh
Apple to produce a system that works
exactly the same. These are similar
enough that for most people doesn't
matter, but if you care, right, um Opus
4.5 anthropics models are tend to be
known as the best writers of the bunch.
They're often quite good at sort of
intellectual topics. They're a little
fussy in terms of um you know they have
high ethical standards relative to the
other models. Um chatbt is um has is
really two different flavors of models.
There's a set of chat models that are
really optimized for you to have
conversations with and roleplay and be
friendly. Um I don't tend to use those
much because I tend to focus more on the
work aspect. And they have a series of
of very logical, very good at long task
models that are very good at producing a
lot of work. And Gemini is an
interesting set. Very smart overall
model. Um, weirdly neurotic like it it
actually gets kind of if you get self
flagagillating if you tell it it did a
bad job. It it it it apologizes and and
kind of gravels. Um, weird kind of
dynamic there. So, they all have their
own sets of personalities and
approaches.
>> I find that um anthropic is more
politically correct.
chat GPT will will give it to me
straighter and then when I go to XAI
it's it seems like it's purposely trying
to offend people. It's going the other
way. Um it's interesting you say that
they both take on personalities. With
respect to differentiation, the data
I've seen is that most of these models
are are converging towards parody that
it is very hard to maintain any sort of
substantial or sustainable
differentiation because AI just reverse
engineers other AI. Do you see the same
regression to the mean that I'm seeing?
>> Well, I wouldn't call regression of the
mean. We are seeing a race, right? There
is there is huge impact. Each model
generation is much more capable than the
one before, right? So we keep crossing
these lines where oh the AI can't do you
know um it can't work with Excel and
suddenly it works with Excel better than
you know and does a dis you know
discounted cash flow analysis better
than most bankers right or you know the
AI can't can't produce a PowerPoint and
suddenly can do that or it can't do math
and suddenly you know last year it won
the both two models won gold the
international math Olympiad so like
there is not it's not a regression in
the mean because there's no drop down of
ability level the ability levels keep
going up but all of the companies in the
space are on roughly the same
development curve, right? Their models
are keep leaprogging each other by a
fairly predictable amount over time and
you can draw a pretty good curve on any
benchmark that you want that shows the
same exponential gain in AI abilities.
So which raises the big question of like
so what happens in the long term and I
think that depends on one of what the
long term of AI looks like. There's one
version where we just keep having a race
of capabilities and you need to stay
ahead and you pick a model maker and as
long as they stick with you you keep
paying them money. There's a version
where one of them achieves what's called
takeoff. Their AI models become
self-improving and they build the
smartest possible model. No one can
catch them and build artificial general
intelligence a machine smarter than a
human every intellectual task. That
there's some sort of apotheiois or
endgame. Or there's a version where
everything sort of plateaus out and then
people spend billions of dollars
building models and eventually free
Chinese models or another company
catches up and there's no money and
becomes commoditized. I don't know which
of those three scenarios dominates.
We'll be right back after a quick break.
Support for today's show comes from
Hungry Root. Habits are hard to change,
and often times it's not about a lack of
motivation, but more about not having
the right options at your disposal.
Like, if you're looking to change up
your diet, you can't expect to make the
move if all you have are snacks and junk
food. That's why there's Hungry Root.
For those of you looking to up your
nutrition and eat healthier, Hungry Root
basically works like a personal
nutrition coach and shopper in one by
planning, recommending, and shopping
everything for you. They take care of
the weekly grocery shopping,
recommending healthy groceries tailored
to your taste, nutrition preferences,
and health goals. We've gotten to try
Hungry Root on the PopG team, and people
reported back that it was surprisingly
easy and good tasting. And people were
able to spend less time worrying about
grocery shopping. Take advantage of this
exclusive offer. For a limited time, get
40% off your first box. Plus, get a free
item in every box for life. Go to
hungerroot.com/propg
and use code propg. That's
hungry.com/propg.
Code propg to get 40% off your first box
and a free item of your choice for life.
Support for Prop comes from Lisa. Your
mornings can't get off to a good start
if you don't get a good night's sleep
and tossing and turning because of your
mattress not being up to par. It's time
to re-evaluate what you're sleeping on.
Lisa mattresses are designed to help you
get the muchneeded RM sleep at night so
you can tackle all the challenges thrown
at you during the day. Lisa has a lineup
of beautifully crafted mattresses
tailored to how you sleep. Each mattress
is designed with specific sleep
positions and feel preferences in mind
from night one. Lisa believes that
you'll feel the difference with their
premium materials that deliver serious
comfort and full body support. no matter
how you sleep. Plus, Lisa mattresses are
meticulously designed and assembled in
the USA for exceptional quality. Go to
lisa.com for 30% off. Plus, get an extra
$50 off with promo code PropG exclusive
for our listeners. That's lessa.com,
promo code propg for 30% off, plus an
extra $50 off. Support our show and let
them know we sent you after checkout.
lisa.com, promo code propg.
I wonder if or one of the thesis we had
for 26 was what I see or potential for
is similar to how the Chinese engaged in
dumping of steel uh predatory pricing
hoping to basically consolidate put
American steel producers out of business
consolidate the market and then have
pricing power. I wonder if the Chinese
are now engaging in what I would refer
to loosely as AI dumping. And that is
some of these models appear to be really
strong. Sort of the Old Navy of AI. 80%
of the best models for 10 20 40 50% of
the price. And a lot of VCs and big
firms have said, "We're using these
models. They're just a better value." Do
you see any sort of geopolitical chess
here around the Chinese engaging in some
form of what I would refer to as AI
dumping? I mean there's something
interesting going on because an open
weights model which is a model that you
release publicly to the world that
anyone can run right so if I want to use
chat GBT I have to go to open AI and use
chat GBT to do that if I want to use one
of the Chinese models like Quen um any
company in the US can download that
model and run it themselves so that
model based on open source made sense
for software because I could give away
my core software for free but then sell
you services it doesn't actually make a
lot of sense for for AI eye companies
because they're building a model and
giving away for free. There's no
ancillary benefit to that. They don't
get a gain in the long term. They're not
selling other solutions. They have no
special prize or tool left behind in
most cases. So, there is a little bit of
weirdness about how long will Chinese
companies sustain releasing free models.
They're about eight months behind, you
know, and consistently eight months
behind the frontier of US models. And,
you know, what's driving that, right? Is
this a state sponsored effort in the
long term? right now it's not clear that
it is but it might be that there is some
sort of you know dumping kind of effort
on the other hand I mean the matter the
degree of intelligence is funible like
if you are talking to a CEO and they're
saying we're going to use a Chinese
model because it's cheaper the cost of
models has dropped 99.9% for the same
intelligence level in three years you'd
be like you actually for most
applications want the smartest model
that's most capable of doing tasks as
cheaply as possible so fixating on a
model that's not as good may end up
being a problem like this isn't an
equation where we're done yet and we
could pick among roughly equivalent
products because we're racing up a curve
of ability that's still changing over
time.
>> When you look at the AI supply chain,
and my guess is you can articulate the
actual supply chain much more cogently
than me, but I think about the
infrastructure layer, the chips. Then I
think about the LLMs and the apps on top
of it and then services for adoption
here. But I also think about power and
data centers. I'm not even sure where
that comes into the stack, but if
there's a choke point here, and it might
be just capital to fund all of this,
what do you think are the biggest choke
points into
uh that stands in between these CEOs
talking about the brave new world of AI?
And um you know, I heard that Nvidia, it
takes 5 years to hook up a data center
in some parts of the nation to the power
grid. What do you see as the choke
points that get in the way of this brave
new world, so to speak?
>> Yeah. And there's a few of them, right?
And they're kind of jockeying against
each other. So as you pointed out, data
centers are are the sort of choke point,
right? How fast can I build one and
especially how fast can I power one and
can I get enough chips to put in one,
right? So that the power and um and uh
building and chips are all a big deal.
For a while, data was the bottleneck,
but AI companies have increasingly found
that they can make their own data. So it
turns out as long as you have some human
data, large language models can create
their own data and other models can
train on that and that you get good
results. So data is not the choke point.
it was, but it could be again. There's
also a research choke point. Um, there's
a lot of things that LM do really well,
but there's some parts of the jagged
frontier that are still very jagged,
right? LM don't have memory. They don't
learn things over time. So, I have to
instruct them every time. It's like I'm
talking to an amnesiac every time I I
speak with an LLM. So, continual
learning is a is a problem that gets in
the way of building these amazing models
for the future. They don't keep
learning, you know, what like that
humans keep learning otherwise you have
to train them every time. So there's
research bottlenecks, there are energy,
power and data center building
bottlenecks. Um and um and those are the
sort of big ones right now. From a
policy perspective, energy is the big
one that all the AI labs are worried
about. They could turn reliably turn
energy and chips into money right now.
Um and the question is how fast can they
build those data centers?
>> I look at these things and you're you're
at the business school. I'm at the
business school. I look at the
valuations of these companies and I see
one of two things needs to happen. the
valuations need to be cut in half or
we're going to see such an incredible
destruction
in human capital or the labor force to
justify the expense here through
efficiencies because I don't see a lot
of new AI cars or AI moisturizers. What
I see is opportunities for efficiencies
which is Latin for cost cutting. But my
thesis is you're either going to see a
really significant uh begin to see a
significant and we haven't seen it so
far to be fair destruction in the labor
force and in more information intensive
industries or we're going to see
valuations come down dramatically. I'm
having a difficult time understanding
how any of these valuations can be
justified uh over the medium-term much
less the long term unless these
companies begin to register massive
efficiencies again layoffs. What do you
think of that thesis?
>> So I I this is where I think that first
of all I think you've laid off the
trade-off really well, right? Which is I
I think that people tend to view
valuations as either bubble or not. But
the truth is valuations are justified if
the revenues can be made to justify
them, right? And the revenue targets are
potentially achievable in a world that
AI actually gets as good as the AI labs
say it's going to get. And we could
argue whether that's going to happen or
not or that there'll be a financial
bubble. I I can't tell you the answer to
that. But I think the real trade-off is
what you just articulated, which is what
what it means for an AI company to
achieve that revenue, right? Let's
assume that they succeed at doing that.
And that's where I think the starkkest
problem is because I do worry a lot when
I talk to CEOs of companies. They're
used to seeing technology as efficiency
gains, right? Which, as you said, it
means layoffs, right? I I want to see
this as like, okay, if one person could
do 40% more work, I need 40% less
people. My desperate desire is to try
and communicate to companies something I
think the AI labs try and say which is
this is also about an expansion of
capabilities right if if you could do
more work and different kinds of work
the boundaries of what a firm could do
could change the capabilities of what
people you expect for people can do this
could be a growth opportunity I mean you
know whether or not you believe them
like Walmart for example has publicly
been stating that they want to keep all
their current employees and figure out
new ways to expand what they do right as
opposed to Amazon which has been kind of
saying we have to cut because of AI
there are other models out there and I
do worry about the lack of imagination
in corporate America where the model is
ah great we could just keep cutting down
our number of people because AI does the
work as opposed to how does everyone
working as a manager what happens if we
get 10 times more code that doesn't mean
we should have 90% less coders maybe
that means we can do different things
than we could do before what happens if
everyone's an analyst what happens if we
can give better experience to every
customer and the failure of imagination
there makes me very nervous
>> my first job out of UCLA was a Morgan
Stanley I was an analyst in the fixed
income department. And I look back on
that, I even found some old PowerPoint
decks I used to pull together to pitch
companies on debt offerings. And I don't
think the two years I spent there, I
don't think it could be distilled to two
weeks, but it could probably be
distilled to 3 months if I just learned
the basics of AI.
Having said that, I haven't seen a huge
destruction in jobs across those
information. And my understanding,
unless he's lying to me, I spoke to
David Solomon. They same levels of
hiring. Big law firms appear. at least
they're saying same levels of hiring. Do
you where do you see the greatest threat
in terms of especially amongst young
people uh coming out of college? I've
seen all of this doom and gloom about
young people but the reality is youth
unemployment is at 10% which is by no
mean alarm means alarming. Do you think
there's a wave of labor destruction at
kind of the entrylevel information
intensive industry? I think that people
overestimate the speed at which large
companies change, right? And so I think
you're right. Like I'd be shocked when
has there ever been a technology
invented 3 years ago that affects the
labor market that quickly? It just
doesn't happen, right? I I I think that
there is change in the system. I think
it's baked in, but I don't think it's
there yet. As you said, companies are
just adopting this now. They're just
telling their employees, "Everyone use
AI for something with no centralized
idea about what that's doing or how it's
valuable." No one has been rebuilding
their process in a serious way around
AI. They're all in their first AI
projects. There's no consultant you
could hire who does this. So there is I
I think that you're right in that as far
as we can tell and there's some debate.
Eric Bolson argues that we're seeing
canaries in the coal mine. Other people
disagree, but there's no giant signal
that AI is responsible for labor changes
right now. Companies are blaming AI
everywhere. But I realistically if you
look inside organizations, there's no
wave yet. That doesn't mean there isn't
going to be. Like it's very hard to see.
For example, let's just take something
that's very well understood which is
coding, computer programming. Like it is
very clear that AI is going to change
how programming works. You could talk to
any coder, any elite coder, and they
know it's going to happen. It privileges
people who know what they're doing. The
experts become more expert. You get a
huge multiplier. Man, it becomes a
management job, not a coding job. And
that's going to change the hiring
market. It just hasn't done it yet. And
I think it's going to take a while for
companies to figure out what that looks
like and what that means.
We'll be right back.
Support for today's show comes from
Northwest Registered Agent. Starting a
business can be overwhelming, but if you
want to take that first step, look no
further than Northwest Registered Agent.
You can get access to thousands of free
resources, forms, and step-by-step
guides without even creating an account.
And when you sign up for a free account,
you can get access to corporate guides.
These are real experts who answer your
questions, no strings attached. And they
don't just help you form your business,
they give you the free tools you need
after you form it, like operating
agreements, meeting minutes, and
thousands of how-to guides that explain
the complicated ins and outs of running
a business. Northwest Registered Agent
has been helping small business owners
and entrepreneurs launch and grow
businesses for nearly 30 years. And when
you're launching your next big thing,
you need experts in your corner to help
you navigate the unique hurdles your
business might face. Don't wait. Protect
your privacy, build your brand, and get
your complete business identity in just
10 clicks and 10 minutes. Visit
northwestregisteredagent.com/profg
free and start building something
amazing. Get more with
Northwestregistered agent at
northwestregistered.com/prof
free.
We're back with more from Ethan Malik.
So, let's shift to academia. all of
these articles over the last two years
and um and I'll put forward this is a
comment posing as a question. I hear
people say, "Oh, you don't need we're
not going to need college with AI." And
I find that people saying that are
because their kid didn't get into and
scored a 22 on the ACT and is trying to
make themselves feel better. Uh I see
absolutely no evidence that AI is
disrupting higher ed. Applications are
up. Your school, my school are both
still figuring out ways to raise tuition
faster than inflation. the whole AI will
make higher education
obsolete. I I just don't see it
happening. I don't see it happening. Um
your thoughts. So I mean a few things. I
think my personal feeling is education
gets a boost from this for reasons I can
discuss in a second, but I mean I think
it's disrupting higher education that
everybody is cheating with AI and essays
are no longer a valuable way of
assigning. There's a lot of disruption
at the school level at the teaching
level. We'll get through that. We always
do. But um but I agree there isn't a
sign that this is devastating higher
education and I don't think that saying
everyone's going to learn with AI and
that's going to be the only way you
learn or you won't need skills anymore
are viable outcomes of in this world. I
think that education will change. Um I
think there's a easy imagine a world
given early evidence that AI when used
properly can be a good tutor. I can
imagine a flipped classroom setting
where my students are engaging with AI
outside of class and inside of class
we're doing more experiential active
learning based case discussions other
things
>> but but that's in the margins. I
actually think that the value of
education, especially professional
education goes up because I teach people
to be generalist at at Wharton, right? I
teach them to be really good at like,
you know, business and maybe they have a
little bit of consulting or strategy
focus or entrepreneurship focus and then
I send them off into the world and they
go like you did to work at Morgan
Stanley or whatever and they learn how
to do their job the same way we've
taught people for 4,000 years, which is
apprenticeship, right? They work they if
you're a middle manager you get this
advantage of a junior person who's
desperate to prove themselves who is
willing to work really hard but isn't
very good but will be and they write
deal memos over and over again and they
get yelled at or given nice feedback and
eventually they learn how to write a
deal memo and that's how we teach
people. You don't have to be good at
managing for them to learn. Ideally,
you're good at teaching, but you don't
have to be. But that's all broken down.
Like already this summer, it broke down,
right? If you're an intern at a company
this last summer, you absolutely were
using Claude or, you know, chatbt and
just turning those answers into people
because it's better than you at at your
job. And middle managers were
increasingly turning to using AI instead
of interns because it it does the work
and doesn't cry, right? And so, as a
result, you saw this loop where nobody
was learning the sort of entry skills
before. So I actually think in a world
where the skill destruction happens at
the intern level, we're going to need to
think more about how we educate people
formally. In a world where informal
education becomes harder to do,
>> how has it changed your role as an
academic in terms of research, how you
prep for class or you know quite frankly
how you make money outside of the school
or or in the traditional confines of
academia. How has AI impacted the way
you approach uh your job? uh in tons of
ways and and I think by the way that's
indicative right because you know the
the way we tend to model jobs right now
in academia is that they're bundles of
tasks right so as a professor I do a ton
of things right I am supposed to teach
classes and design classes and grade you
know assignments and be emotionally
available to my students and also be a
good administrator and review papers and
write papers and be on podcast write
books all of that stuff right tons of
stuff and it's an impossible set of
tasks I mean most people's jobs have a
ton of tasks that they're not getting to
or doing badly. So, if the AI the AI has
already taken some of these things from
me, right? Some of them I won't do for
social reasons. The AI is a better
grader than me, but as of yet, I haven't
let it do grading because my students
expect me to grade the papers, but maybe
that will change. Um, you know, it does
there's a lot of administrative tasks
I've handed over to AI to do. When I do
research, my research time is cut
dramatically because the AI can do all
the code writing and everything else and
I can look at the answers. It's like I'm
an RA. But, it's gotten better than
that. I can throw a full academic paper
that I've written a couple years ago
into chatb 5.2 Pro, which is the
smartest model out there. It will find
errors that require it to have run its
own Monte Carlo analysis on assumptions
from a table from table three and table
five put together and will say actually
you should have done find errors that I
I couldn't have found otherwise. So
especially when used by a skilled human
I'm finding everything I do is more
efficient. Like I write you know this
one useful thing substack. There's a lot
of readers. I do not I write all my own
first drafts, right? Because I want to
be my voice. But if I didn't have Claude
checking all the, you know, what I write
to make sure it makes sense, it would
take me days to put out a piece that
takes me a few hours to write because I
know I have a a good voice as a as a
cross checker to work with as a
researcher. So, in almost every aspect
of what I do, I mean, I use AI for
everything. And sometimes it's huge
efficiency gains of hours and sometimes
it's, you know, a couple minutes here or
there.
>> Absolutely hear you. I'm everything
right now. fact check this. What
additional data would be illuminating to
my points? Where am I redundant? And the
idea of peerreview research in academia,
it feels like we're just going to let
need fewer peers to review. And one of
those peers probably should be AI. No,
>> I mean it that peerreview research is in
a middle of it was always is always in
crisis, right? Just like everything
associated with universities, academia,
but the crisis is pretty bad right now
because um all the signaling associated
with papers, right? So peer review
depended on you being able to filter out
the crap so that you could at least say
okay this paper is worth looking at more
and worth a couple hours of my time. The
problem with AI and there's a nice paper
showing this. The problem with AI
produced content is it scrambles our
signals and it makes it very hard for
you to tell whether it's crap or not
without a lot of effort. So human peer
review is suffering under a flood of
tons of papers being produced with AI
help and and harder to signal which
papers are good or bad in advance. So,
it's hard for us to spend the time doing
this, right? And then, of course, who's
reading all these papers now that AI is
producing all of them. So, I think we're
going to have to include AI in the peer
reviewview process, like you said. But
then the question is, is AI producing
research for AI that it gets published
in AI journals that no human ever reads?
Like there's a there's sort of a you
could fear the fear you hear the
creaking underneath the whole edifice of
academic publishing as we try and figure
out what comes next. It feels like one
spot if you really wanted to be hopeful
would be medical research. Uh Grant,
you're not at the med school, but you
are at the business school and
healthcare in America is basically been
it's monetized. It's now about profits.
Are you excited about the potential the
intersection between AI and drug
discovery and you know my friend Whitney
Tilson said that basically Chad GP I'm
sorry Gemini diagnosed his father and
saved his life.
Let's start there. The the health
industrial complex in America, how
excited are you about the intersection
of AI in that industry? And what other
industries do you also think really
stand to benefit exceptional returns
with the advent of AI?
>> So, you know, and with the usual caveat
that the more uh the more complicated
the industry and the more regulated, the
slower adoption of AI tends to be, I I
think medicine is an incredibly exciting
area. So you talked about a few areas
like one of them is Google especially
but other companies are deeply dedicated
to how do we automate research or
accelerate academic research and I think
that there's a lot of value there. We're
starting to see actual reasonable
scientific work being done by AIS and
the hope is that agentic systems can
autonomously do directed research in the
near future which will lead to a flood
of of you know because we're researcher
constrained a flood of of of new
discoveries. So there's hope there in
that space. I think there's also, you
know, when you talk to AI companies like
Madna has been very open, I drug
companies like Madna has been very open
about their use of AI. There's tons of
things that companies have to do that
slow down the drug development,
discovery, and testing process that are
administrative. And the AI helps with
all of those things. You get huge value
legally and in building forms and
materials. On the doctor's side, you
know, we even just things like
translation. It turns out that if you
use AI to give people a pre-operative
form that they understand, they actually
are happier with their surgery, have
less issues, and are more likely to
report success because they got the
information away they understood. Right?
Second opinions, you obviously should be
using an LM for a second opinion. I I
can't say you should use it to replace
your doctor, but they're good enough
that as in every kind of controlled
experiment that they're worthwhile,
especially where imaging is not
involved. They're they're not as good at
imaging. So I would not trust a
radiologist report from a large language
model. But in terms of you know giving a
second opinion or if you're stuck
amazing at that people that have access
to good healthcare or good doctors
terrific. And then there's just the
administrative breakthrough piece right
if the if the forms get filled out by AI
if some of the processing gets done by
AI doing the grunt work behind the
scenes there's possibilities for gains
of efficiency over administration. None
of these things are automatic though
right? They require actual leadership
and structural change to make happen.
And that's I think the level where
things get stuck is not so much can AI
do this but how will organizations
respond.
>> You brought up Mona and I think of
vaccines as a technology that the big
winners were all of us and that is Mona
stock I think is off 90%. And I don't
think a lot of companies have, you know,
made huge companies on or huge market
cap companies in the back of vaccines.
When I think about, you know, I've been
in four countries in the last 5 days and
the ability to skirt along the surface
of the atmosphere at 710 the speed of
sound. I don't think there's any
technology that's changed my life more.
And yet airlines and aircraft
manufacturers without government
subsidies have basically all of them,
you know, either gone out of business or
going out of business. And it feels like
lately we become used to believing that
any innovation in technology the market
share or the stakeholder gains gets
sequestered to a small number of
companies. Do you think there's any
possibility that the real winners of AI
will be us? And that is the sense that
we're under this illusion that a small
number of companies are going to build
multi-trillion dollar market cap
companies. But this technology because
of the inability to create ring fence
distribution or IP that the real value
might be disseminated to the general
public and we won't see and quite
frankly just these current valuations
will not hold up which isn't to say AI
isn't going to change the world. It's
just that change isn't going to involve
a small number of companies that are
multi-trillion dollar market cap. Could
we see a huge destruction in shareholder
value across these companies while
seeing huge stakeholder value similar to
what happened with um you know vaccines
or even PCs?
>> Well, any frontier company, frontier
model company can destroy the market
anytime they want given the condition
that they release their models open
weights, right? Um which is what the
Chinese models are doing. They're so it
all comes down to whether or not
>> Explain open weight.
>> Yeah. So an openw weight model is the is
so AI is basically are a bunch of math
right and the weights inside these
models are basically what determine how
they operate. So if you have the
weights, this set of, you know, the the
mathematical equations the AI needs, you
can run your own AI model, right? So um
and once they're out there, no one can
claim the back. There's no other piece
to it. You just need this piece of
information. So increasingly, um what
the strategy for the also rans which are
the Chinese companies and uh Mistral,
which is a French European company, is
to release all their AI models open
weights. So you can find a ton of people
in the United States who run those
models. They can run them in their
internal safe data centers. They can
have you know a third party run them and
the only money that you make from that
is the money that you have to pay for
the power and electricity and you know
security and network access to the
models. So you don't have to pay anyone
a fee for using them. And so right now
it's such that those models are much uh
are less capable um than what you get
from OpenAI or or um or anthropic or
Gemini. But it's possible that at some
point in the future they catch up
because the development of a process
slows down and at that point then a lot
of value flows out of the system.
>> And Ethan, are you a father?
>> I am. Yes.
>> Uh how many kids?
>> I have two kids.
And when you're you're kind of the helm
of the bobsled here of seeing AI and the
impact it's going to have on the next
generation of of you know on the next
generation how if and how has it changed
your view of the future your kids are
going to face and has it in any way
changed your approach to parenting or
what you'd like to see them prepare for
or what skills you think they need to
acquire like looking this at through the
lens of a dad who als also really
understands and is probably going to
guess more right than wrong about where
this all heads. Has it changed your
viewpoint of your kid's future?
>> I mean, yes. Right. I mean, there's more
uncert There's always uncertainty. As a
parent, you worry, right? Are you making
the right choices? Are your kids making
the right choices? They're their own
people. They make their own decisions.
It certainly has changed, you know, my
view on careers a little bit. I think
that thinking about jobs, I don't know
what jobs are going to be in the future.
One thing we know about work, I'm a
professor of entrepreneurship, is that,
you know, jobs change. people find all
sorts of things to do. I'm less certain
that they pick one path and stick with
it. I want them to pick jobs that are
diverse where they do many different
tasks in case AI takes some of them, but
I also want them to do what they love.
So, I don't know enough what the future
holds to discourage them from being a
lawyer or a doctor or whatever they want
to be because I don't know what that
future holds. In terms of actual
parenting, I find uh you know, AI useful
in a cautious way. I'm kind of lucky
enough that my kids were old enough when
LLM came out that I weren't wor wasn't
worried they'd build a like a parasocial
relationship with them. We've we've
worked a lot on internet and, you know,
how to how to work with these systems.
And I I don't not worry that they're
going to turn to these for, you know, as
as as serious relationships, but we have
spent a lot of time thinking about how
you use them for education. So, when
they were a little bit younger, I would
insist if we used if I used AI to help
them, I would actually ask the AI, help
me explain this the way I would to a
ninth grader. Um, and I take a picture
of an assignment and be like, okay, now
I can help explain this to you. As they
get older, uh, I've, you know, they've
increasingly used the kind of quizzing
mode. They they know the AI won't teach
them unless they ask to be taught. So
they use either the study modes for the
AI systems or they actually ask them
like don't give me an answer, challenge
me and quiz me and prepare me and tell
me what I don't know. So there's lots of
like little talented stuff to use it.
Now in terms of the wider future, I
don't know what happens. Like I mean I
grew up in an age of like we thought
nuclear war would happen any moment. Uh
I think now we have new anxieties. I I'm
an anxious parent. Who can't be? But I
also think that preparing resilient kids
who are self-reliant and have some
ability to improvise is more important
than ever.
>> When I first when my parents got
divorced, I moved to this new
um elementary school in Tarzana. I think
it was Emolina. Anyways, I walked in and
the teacher introduced me and then she
was started writing and then she turned
around and screamed duck and cover. And
everyone dove under their desk. I'm like
what the [__] And I'm sitting there
like not knowing what to do. And she's
like, "We do this in case you see a
nuclear flash." We were doing duck and
cover drills. I mean, it was just we
were as if that was going to save us,
that this wooden desk was going to
protect us from nucle nuclear blast, but
we were doing we even had films on it.
What to do when the when the Ruskies
detonate a nuclear bomb. Do you think
the catastrophizing around the offensive
nature or possibility for these this AI
is is uh is overestimated? And then a
more personal question, you know, I
don't have to ask you. Do you have a go
bag? Do you have a plan for if all of a
sudden, you know, we lose control and
okay, Mollik meet here and we're headed
to the, you know, the Appalachian
Mountains or whatever.
>> Uh, you know, um, so it's funny. I I
think that that like I want some people
catastrophizing because that's what
government should be doing. Like we need
policies and procedures in place
catastrophic stuff, right? Like I don't
stay up at night which might be dumb,
right? There's a lot of very smart
people who think AI is going to murder
us all. There's a bunch of smart people
who think it's going to, you know,
become a god and save us all. I I you
know, maybe it's the business school
professor and me or something, but I
tend to be really focused on like, oh,
there's actually a lot of like humans
are flexible. There's a lot of way like
we get used to doing many different
things and living in many different
lifestyles. Our goal should be to guide
things in the best direction that we can
right now. I am not preparing for the
apocalypse on a on a regular basis. I
for part of the reason that I think
catastrophizing like that isn't that
helpful and uh you know I I don't know
what what world you're preparing for a
catastrophe in. There's a thousand
things that could that could end the
world. Um, and so, but I understand and
appreciate the anxiety of other people
and think it's valuable that they're
there as long as we're channeling that
into, you know, stop gap measures. I
mean, I'd like to see the government
think more about catastrophic risk. Not
because it's my giant concern, but
because very smart people are concerned
about it, right? And you don't just get
through crises and hope you muddle
through. You make plans. I don't think
the plans to be made at the individual
level. I think it's a societal and
governmental level that we need to be
starting to think about how to shape AI.
And by the way, it's not just
catastrophic will AI murder us all or,
you know, invent a chemical weapon that
would, you know, that kills everybody or
will a bad guy using AI do these things,
but it's all the other risks they worry
about, too. Deep fakes are a real
problem. I can create an image of
anybody saying anything I want. How do
we respond to that as a society, right,
of of being able to do that stuff? How
do we start responding to make sure
that, as we talked about earlier, that
AI is not automatically translated to
job loss, but is that there's a period
of exploration to try and figure out how
to make it do something better? How do
we think about using this in education a
positive way? How do we think about
avoiding parasocial relationships with
AI systems that are negative for us? I
mean, these are policy decisions and we
can help make that I think are really
important.
>> Do you think we should agegate synthetic
relationships?
>> I I I I think we don't know enough. So,
probably caution is warranted, right?
Like there is mixed research right now
on there are some papers that suggest
that AI lowers the uh you know rates of
suicide ideation for the very lonely or
decreases loneliness of short term. We
have no idea what the long-term effects
are. I I don't think that age gating is
a particularly bad idea for for
synthetic AI characters that try and act
like people. Um you know I because we
don't know what the effects are. Um I I
think it's easy to be alarmist and
catastrophic about it. The effects may
end up being very good. I don't know.
But neither does anyone else.
Just as we wrap up here and you've been
generous with your time, a lot of young
people listening to the podcast, you're
kind of rounding third. You've you've
built a great career for yourself. My
sense is you have influence. You do
something you enjoy. You're at the right
place at the right time. You make a good
living. Talk a little bit about your
career path and what lessons you can
provide to younger people who might be
thinking about a career in academia or
just general professional advice more
generally. You know, the first thing I
said and and my colleague, Professor
Matthew Bidwell talks about this a lot
is like careers are long. Like I've
studied careers and like there are many
different things and mine's an example.
I I actually uh went uh you grew up in
Wisconsin um and and uh lived my whole
life there and then went to the East
Coast for school. uh did the mandatory
job of being a consultant for like you
know 18 months and then launched a
startup company with a with a a
brilliant friend and roommate uh in 1998
or 1997 where we invented the payw wall.
I still feel a little bad about that. Um
but nobody really understood what the
payw wall was because the internet was
new. Um but we we were you know through
20some people trying to sell this
product to everyone. I personally made
every possible mistake in this company.
It did did well but not not not that
much thanks to me. decided to get an MBA
to figure out how to do it right.
Realized nobody knew how to do startups,
right? Got a PhD um and then started
studying games and education and AI and
have had that in the whole thing. So
like I've done many many things in my
career and my main advice to people is
that careers are long and there's a
tendency especially for young people
today who come out of very regimented
system to think that they have to have a
plan like the next thing you have to be
completely prepped for like I need to
know everything I need to know to be you
know to do something entrepreneurship I
hear this all the time like I need to
you know learn this and I've worked at
this company and that's not how this
works right there's no perfect moment
there's no perfect skill set and it's an
evolution exploratory process I don't
think that'll change in in the near term
with AI. And I think the idea of being
flexible, of trying different things, of
experimenting, of getting your own
skills out there and using your own
agency to to try and find path forward
is is the way to go. It's never easy and
I've been lucky in a lot of these
choices. Um, but I think that there is,
you know, that thinking about how you
want to, you know, take take your next
step on your own rather than following a
predefined path can be very useful.
Ethan Mollik is a professor at the
Wharton School and a leading voice on
how AI is changing work, creativity, and
education. He also writes the popular
Substack, one useful thing, and has
coined terms including the the what is
it? The jagged frontier and
co-intelligence. And he joins us from
his home outside of Philadelphia. Ethan,
I love uh seeing people such as yourself
who've just put in a ton of work be as
successful and as influential as you
are. Congratulations on all your
success. I trust you're taking time to
pause and just register that you, you
know, you have arrived, so to speak.
>> I haven't taken time to pause, but it is
nice to know that I could do that at
some point.
>> At some point. Thanks, Ethan.